[docs] Updating Rollup tutorial (#16762)
apache/druid: docs/tutorials/tutorial-rollup.md

  -->

> Apache Druid&circledR; can summarize raw data at ingestion time using a process known as "rollup". Rollup is a first-level aggregation operation over a selected set of columns that reduces the size of stored data.

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the actual rollup docs? Either link it from existing text, or add a new sentence ("For more information...")
https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/concepts#rollup
https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/ingestion/rollup

Author: Both links added

> This tutorial demonstrate the effects of rollup on an example dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates the effects of rollup on an example dataset.
```

> For this tutorial, you should have Druid downloaded as described in

Reviewer 3: For consistency, let's introduce a new section called "Prerequisites". See [Query for latest data](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/tutorials/tutorial-latest-by#prerequisites) and [Append data](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/tutorials/tutorial-append-data#prerequisites) for reference. You can copy and paste the text from the "Prerequisites" section on the "Append data" tutorial. Also, remove the reference to the "Load a file" tutorial since it no longer applies here.

Author: [x] "Prerequisites" added
[x] Copy the "Append data" Prerequisites section
[x] remove reference to "Load a file"

the [single-machine quickstart](index.md) and have it running on your local machine. The examples in the tutorial use the [multi-stage query](../multi-stage-query/index.md) (MSQ) task engine to execute SQL statements.

> It is helpful to have finished [Load a file](../tutorials/tutorial-batch.md) and [Query data](../tutorials/tutorial-query.md) tutorials.

Author: Section was turned into a prerequisite section modeled after another file, I believe doing so resolved this as well. As @ektravel points out, Load a file is no longer necessary.

> ## Example data

Reviewer 3: We don't need a separate section to talk about the example. Combine this section with "Load the example data". So remove the "Example data" heading and keep the "Load the example data" heading.

Author: Removed the example data heading and replace with "Load the example data". Then removed the original "Load the example data" header

> For this tutorial, you use a small sample of network flow event data, representing packet and byte counts for traffic from a source to a destination IP address that occurred within a particular second.

Author: applyed suggestion

  -->

> Apache Druid&circledR; can summarize raw data at ingestion time using a process known as "rollup." [Rollup](../ingestion/rollup.md) is a first-level aggregation operation over a selected set of columns that reduces the size of stored data.

Reviewer 3: Link to the MSQ rollup doc (https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/concepts/#rollup) instead but use relative path.

Author: relative link added

> The tutorial demonstrates how to apply rollup at ingestion and shows the effect of rollup at query time. See [ingesting with rollup](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/concepts/#rollup) to learn more. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to apply rollup during ingestion and highlights its effects during query execution. 
```
Remove this line as it doesn't apply to the preceding sentence. Replace the link on line 27 with this link (https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/concepts/#rollup) but use the relative path.

Author: removed "See ingesting with rollup to learn more." and added "The examples in the tutorial use the multi-stage query (MSQ) task engine to executes SQL statements." in its place

## Prerequisites

Before proceeding, download Druid as described in [Quickstart (local)](index.md) and have it running on your local machine. You don't need to load any data into the Druid cluster.

You should be familiar with data querying in Druid. If you haven't already, go through the [Query data](../tutorials/tutorial-query.md) tutorial first.

## Load the example data

> For this tutorial, you use a small sample of network flow event data, representing IP traffic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, you use a small sample of network flow event data representing IP traffic.
```

Author: removed the comma

{"timestamp":"2018-01-02T21:35:45Z","srcIP":"7.7.7.7", "dstIP":"8.8.8.8","packets":12,"bytes":2818}
```

> The tutorial guides you through how to ingest this data using rollup.

Reviewer 3: This line is repetitive. Accept Victoria's suggestion and move this line to the introduction. Replace line 26 (This tutorial demonstrates the effects of rollup on an example dataset.) with this line.

## Load the example data

> Load the sample dataset using INSERT and EXTERN functions. The EXTERN function lets you read external data or write to an external location.

Reviewer 3: Give that the example uses both [INSERT INTO](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/reference/#insert) and [EXTERN](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/reference/#extern-function), at the very least we should link to the relevant docs. 

For example:
Load the same dataset using the INSERT INTO statement and the EXTERN function.

> Load the sample dataset using INSERT and EXTERN functions. The EXTERN function lets you read external data or write to an external location.

Author: links have been added

> In the Druid web console, go to the Query view and run the following query:

Reviewer 3: Add a link for the web console: https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/web-console

Author: Link added to web console page

> In the Druid web console, go to the Query view and run the following query:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the Druid web console, go to the **Query** view and run the following query:
```

    '{"type":"json"}')) 
    EXTEND ("timestamp" VARCHAR, "srcIP" VARCHAR, "dstIP" VARCHAR, "packets" BIGINT, "bytes" BIGINT)
)
SELECT
  FLOOR(TIME_PARSE("timestamp") TO MINUTE) AS __time,
  "srcIP",
  "dstIP",
  SUM("bytes") AS "bytes",

>   COUNT(*) AS "count",

Reviewer 3: Let's put `COUNT(*) AS "count"` (line 75) last (after `SUM("packets") AS "packets"`).

Author: Moved it to the the last line

  SUM("packets") AS "packets"
FROM "inline_data"
GROUP BY 1, 2, 3
PARTITIONED BY DAY
```

Note that the query uses the `FLOOR` function to give the `__time` a granularity of `MINUTE`. The query defines the dimensions of the rollup by grouping columns 1, 2, and 3, which corresponds to the `timestamp`, `srcIP`, and `dstIP` columns. The query defines the metrics of the rollup by aggregating the `bytes` and `packets` columns.

After the ingestion completes, you can query the data.

## Query the example data

> Open a new tab in the Query view and run the following query to see what data was ingested:

Reviewer: * Specify that this is the web console (you can also add a link to it)
* Query should be in bold since it's the name of the view

Author: [x]Query is made bold
[x]added "In the web console,..."

```sql
SELECT * FROM "rollup_tutorial"
```

Returns the following:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:01:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `35,937` | `3` | `286` |
| `2018-01-01T01:02:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `366,260` | `2` | `415` |
| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |
| `2018-01-02T21:33:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `100,288` | `2` | `161` |
| `2018-01-02T21:35:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `2,818` | `1` | `12` |

Consider the three events in the original input data that occur over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:01`:

```json
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:35Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":20,"bytes":9024}
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:51Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":255,"bytes":21133}
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:59Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":11,"bytes":5780}
```

> Druid combines the three rows into the following during rollup:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Druid combines the three rows into one during rollup:
```
I think we can shorten this sentence.

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:01:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `35,937` | `3` | `286` |

> The input rows have been grouped by the timestamp and dimension columns `{timestamp, srcIP, dstIP}` with sum aggregations on the metric columns `packets` and `bytes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The input rows were grouped by the timestamp and dimension columns `{timestamp, srcIP, dstIP}` with sum aggregations on the metric columns `packets` and `bytes`.
```

> Before the grouping occurs, the timestamps of the original input data are bucketed/floored by minute, due to the `FLOOR(TIME_PARSE("timestamp") TO MINUTE)` function in the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the grouping occurs, the timestamps of the original input data are bucketed (floored) by minute, due to the `FLOOR(TIME_PARSE("timestamp") TO MINUTE)` expression in the query.
```

> Consider the two events in the original input data that occur over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:02`:

Reviewer: The query section is a bit long -- add subheader titles to help break it up for easier navigation

Author: Split the section into two, new header on line 108

> Consider the two events in the original input data that occur over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:02`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider the two events in the original input data that occur over the course of the minute `2018-01-01T01:02`:
```
Should this say "the course of the minute" or "the course of one minute?"

```json
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:02:14Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":38,"bytes":6289}
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:02:29Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":377,"bytes":359971}
```

The rows have been grouped into the following during rollup:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:02:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `366,260` | `2` | `415` |

In the original input data, only one event occurs over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:03`:

```json
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:03:29Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":49,"bytes":10204}
```

> Therefore no rollup takes place:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, no rollup takes place:
```

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |

> Note that the `count` metric shows how many rows in the original input data contributed to the final "rolled up" row.

Reviewer: I think this sentence better belongs somewhere earlier in the doc

Author: Move to the the first example where three rows are rollup up into one

  COUNT(*) AS "count"
FROM "inline_data"
GROUP BY 1, 2, 3
PARTITIONED BY DAY
```

Note that the query uses the `FLOOR` function to combine rows based on MINUTE granularity.
In the query, you group by dimensions, the `timestamp`, `srcIP`, and `dstIP` columns.
You apply aggregations for the metrics, specifically to sum the `bytes` and `packets` columns and to add a column to count the number of rows that get rolled up.

After the ingestion completes, you can query the data.

## Query the example data

In the web console, open a new tab in the **Query** view. Run the following query to view the ingested data:

```sql
SELECT * FROM "rollup_tutorial"
```

Returns the following:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:01:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `35,937` | `3` | `286` |
| `2018-01-01T01:02:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `366,260` | `2` | `415` |
| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |
| `2018-01-02T21:33:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `100,288` | `2` | `161` |
| `2018-01-02T21:35:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `2,818` | `1` | `12` |

> 

Author: Not sure if a better title exists

    '{"type":"json"}')) 
    EXTEND ("timestamp" VARCHAR, "srcIP" VARCHAR, "dstIP" VARCHAR, "packets" BIGINT, "bytes" BIGINT)
)
SELECT
  FLOOR(TIME_PARSE("timestamp") TO MINUTE) AS __time,
  "srcIP",
  "dstIP",
  SUM("bytes") AS "bytes",
  SUM("packets") AS "packets",
  COUNT(*) AS "count"
FROM "inline_data"
GROUP BY 1, 2, 3
PARTITIONED BY DAY
```

In the query, you group by dimensions, `timestamp`, `srcIP`, and `dstIP`. Note that the query uses the `FLOOR` function to bucket rows based on MINUTE granularity.

> For the metrics, you apply aggregations to sum the `bytes` and `packets` columns and add a column that counts the number of rows that get rolled up.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the metrics, you apply aggregations to sum the `bytes` and `packets` columns and add a column that counts the number of rolled-up rows.
```

Author: changed to rolled-up

> In the query, you group by dimensions, `timestamp`, `srcIP`, and `dstIP`. Note that the query uses the `FLOOR` function to bucket rows based on MINUTE granularity.
> For the metrics, you apply aggregations to sum the `bytes` and `packets` columns and add a column that counts the number of rows that get rolled-up.

Reviewer: It seems better to put timestamp first, so you can describe metrics and dimensions together. Or maybe a list like follows:

```suggestion
Note the following aspects of the ingestion statement:
* You transform the timestamp field using the `FLOOR` function to round timestamps down to the minute.
* You group by the dimensions `timestamp`, `srcIP`, and `dstIP`.
* You create the `bytes` and `packets` metrics, which are summed from their respective input fields.
* You also create the `count` metric that records the number of rows that get rolled-up per each row in the datasource.
```

Author: I like the list idea, helps distinguish between the different concepts

> 

Reviewer: Pulling this description from the [rollup](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/ingestion/rollup) doc to make it more instructive for users following the tutorial. This is more of a general preview, then the "view in action" section explains it in more detail for the user.

```suggestion

With rollup, Druid combines rows with identical timestamp and dimension values after the timestamp truncation.
Druid computes and stores the metric values using the specified aggregation function over each set of rolled-up rows.

```

After the ingestion completes, you can query the data.

## Query the example data

In the web console, open a new tab in the **Query** view. Run the following query to view the ingested data:

```sql
SELECT * FROM "rollup_tutorial"
```

Returns the following:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:01:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `35,937` | `3` | `286` |
| `2018-01-01T01:02:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `366,260` | `2` | `415` |
| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |
| `2018-01-02T21:33:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `100,288` | `2` | `161` |
| `2018-01-02T21:35:00.000Z` | `7.7.7.7` | `8.8.8.8` | `2,818` | `1` | `12` |

> Notice there are only six rows as opposed to the nine rows in the example data. The next section covers how ingestion with rollup accomplishes this.

Reviewer: "six rows" --> isn't this five?

Author: you are correct, it should be five

> Notice there are only six rows as opposed to the nine rows in the example data. The next section covers how ingestion with rollup accomplishes this.

Reviewer: You're not really going into "how rollup works" -- maybe this phrasing would be more accurate

```suggestion
Notice there are only six rows as opposed to the nine rows in the example data. In the next section, you explore the components of the rolled-up rows.
```

## View rollup in action

Consider the three events in the original input data that occur over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:01`:

```json
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:35Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":20,"bytes":9024}
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:51Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":255,"bytes":21133}
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:01:59Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":11,"bytes":5780}
```

Druid combines the three rows into one during rollup:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:01:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `35,937` | `3` | `286` |

Before the grouping occurs, the `FLOOR(TIME_PARSE("timestamp") TO MINUTE)` expression buckets (floors) the timestamp column of the original input by minute.

> The input rows are grouped because they have the same values for their dimension columns `{timestamp, srcIP, dstIP}`. The metric columns calculate the sum aggregation of the grouped rows for `packets` and `bytes`. The `count` metric shows how many rows from the original input data contributed to the final "rolled up" row.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The input rows are grouped because they have the same values for their dimension columns `{timestamp, srcIP, dstIP}`. The metric columns calculate the sum aggregation of the grouped rows for `packets` and `bytes`. The `count` metric shows how many rows from the original input data contributed to the final rolled-up row.
```

Author: "roll up" changed to rolled-up

For the last event recording traffic between 1.1.1.1 and 2.2.2.2, no rollup took place, because this was the only event that occurred during `2018-01-01T01:03`:
| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:02:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `366,260` | `2` | `415` |

In the original input data, only one event occurs over the course of minute `2018-01-01T01:03`:

```json
{"timestamp":"2018-01-01T01:03:29Z","srcIP":"1.1.1.1", "dstIP":"2.2.2.2","packets":49,"bytes":10204}
```

```bash
┌──────────────────────────┬────────┬───────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────────┐
│ __time                   │ bytes  │ count │ dstIP   │ packets │ srcIP   │
├──────────────────────────┼────────┼───────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤
│ 2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z │  10204 │     1 │ 2.2.2.2 │      49 │ 1.1.1.1 │
└──────────────────────────┴────────┴───────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────────┘
```
Therefore, no rollup takes place:

| `__time` | `srcIP` | `dstIP` | `bytes` | `count` | `packets` |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |

> Note that the `count` metric shows how many rows in the original input data contributed to the final "rolled up" row.

Reviewer: At the end, can you add a "Learn more" section? See the append data tutorial for a model. You can link to the rollup section of the SQL-based ingestion docs, as well as the more general rollup documentation. Add anything else you think may be helpful for the reader.

Author: Added 4 links in the learn more page

| `2018-01-01T01:03:00.000Z` | `1.1.1.1` | `2.2.2.2` | `10,204` | `1` | `49` |

> ## Learn More

Reviewer: Remember to double check for sentence case
```suggestion
## Learn more
```

See the following topics for more information:

* [SQL-based ingestion query examples](../multi-stage-query/examples.md/#insert-with-rollup) for another example of data rollup during ingestion.

* [SQL-based ingestion concepts](../multi-stage-query/concepts/#rollup) for more details on the concept of rollup.

* [Data rollup](../ingestion/rollup/) for suggestions and best practices when performing rollup.

* [Druid schema model](../ingestion/schema-model.md) to go over more details on timestamp, dimensions, and metrics.

> 

Reviewer: Make sure to use .md links (and verify that they work 🙂 )

```suggestion
* [SQL-based ingestion query examples](../multi-stage-query/examples.md#insert-with-rollup) for another example of data rollup during ingestion.
* [SQL-based ingestion concepts](../multi-stage-query/concepts.md#rollup) for more details on the concept of rollup.
* [Data rollup](../ingestion/rollup.md) for suggestions and best practices when performing rollup.
* [Druid schema model](../ingestion/schema-model.md) to go over more details on timestamp, dimensions, and metrics.

```
